In this section, we describe the four solvers that we have implemented
for solving the fluid equations.  We describe the PPM method in
considerably more detail than the other methods in part because its
implementation in Enzo has not previously been described, but mostly
because it introduces many of the ideas and methods used for the
MUSCL-Dedner and MHDCT schemes (including expansion terms,
reconstruction, Riemann solvers, and dual energy formalism).

\subsection{Hydrodynamics: The PPM method}
\label{sec.hydro.ppm}

One (purely) hydrodynamic method used in \enzo\ is closely based on
the piecewise parabolic method (PPM) of \citet{1984JCoPh..54..174C} --
henceforth referred to as CW84 -- which has been modified for the
study of cosmological fluid flows.  CW84 describe two variants on this
method: Lagrangian Remap and Direct Eulerian.  We use the Direct
Eulerian version in \enzo, which is better suited for AMR simulations.
The Lagrangian Remap version has previously been adapted for
cosmological use as described in \citet{1995CoPhC..89..149B}, and the
implementation we use here is closely based on that work.

The first term on the right hand side of equations~(\ref{eq:momentum})
and (\ref{eq:total_energy}) comes from our choice of comoving
coordinates (a similar term also appears in
equation~(\ref{eq:dm_velocity}), the velocity relation for the dark
matter particles).  A similar term does not appear in the mass
conservation equation (\ref{eq:mass}) because of the comoving density
definition.  We note that these expansion terms could be eliminated
entirely by the proper choice of variables (including time), although
we have not done so here as they do not constitute a major source of
error.  We solve these terms using the same technique -- they are
split from the rest of the terms and solved using an (implicit)
time-centered method, which is straightforward as there are no spatial
gradients.  Note that we use this method for all four of the hydro
solvers.

The remainder of the terms in the fluid equations involve derivatives.
Because we are interested in phenomena with no special geometry, we
will restrict discussion to Cartesian coordinates.  We can
dimensionally split the equations and rewrite the one-dimensional
(Eulerian) versions of
equations~(\ref{eq:mass})--(\ref{eq:total_energy}) without expansion
terms in conservative form as,
\begin{eqnarray}
\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t}  + \frac{1}{a} \frac{\partial \rho v }{\partial x}    & = &  
     0 \label{eq:mass1d} \\
\frac{\partial \rho v}{\partial t}  + \frac{1}{a} \frac{\partial \rho v^2}{\partial x}   + 
      \frac{1}{a} \frac{\partial p}{ \partial x} & = & 
      \rho \frac{g}{a}  \label{eq:momentum1d}  \\
\frac{\partial \rho E}{\partial t}  + \frac{1}{a} \frac{\partial \rho v E}{\partial x}  & =  &
      \rho v \frac{g}{a} \label{eq:total_energy1d}
\end{eqnarray}
%
Here $x$ and $v$ refer to the one dimensional comoving position and 
peculiar velocity of the baryonic gas, and $g$ is the acceleration at the cell center.
These equations are now in a form that can be solved by the split PPM scheme.

% ------------------------------------------------------------

We now restrict ourselves to the solution of equations
(\ref{eq:mass1d})--(\ref{eq:total_energy1d}) in one dimension.  In the
Direct Eulerian version of PPM, this is accomplished by a three-step
process.  First, we compute effective left and right states at each
grid boundary by constructing a piecewise parabolic description of the
primative variables ($\rho$, $u$ and $E$) and then averaging over the
regions corresponding to the distance each characteristic wave can
travel ($u$, $u-c_s$ and $u+c_s$, where $c_s$ is the sound speed).
Second, a Riemann problem is solved using these effective left and
right states, and finally the fluxes are computed based on the
solution to this Riemann problem and the conserved quantities are
updated.  This is described in detail in CW84, but we will briefly
outline the procedure here both for completeness and to put the
changes we will make in context.

The Eulerian difference equations are:
%
\newcommand{\avp}[1]{\overline{#1}_{j+1/2}}
\newcommand{\avm}[1]{\overline{#1}_{j-1/2}}
\begin{equation}
\rho_j^{n+1} = \rho_j^{n} + \Delta t \left( 
                      \frac{ \avp{\rho}\avp{v} -  \avm{\rho}\avm{v} } {\Delta x_j}
            \right)
     \label{eq:mass_diff}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
\rho_j^{n+1} v_{j}^{n+1} =
       \rho_j^{n+1} v_j^n  + \Delta t \left(
          \frac{ \avp{\rho} \avp{v}^2 - \avm{\rho} \avm{v}^2 + \avp{p} - \avm{p}} {\Delta x_j}
             \right)
     + \frac{ \Delta t }{2} g_j^{n+1/2} (\rho_j^n + \rho_j^{n+1}), 
     \label{eq:momentum_diff}
\end{equation}
\begin{eqnarray}
\rho_j^{n+1} E_j^{n+1}  = 
       \rho_j^n E_j^n  & + & \Delta t  \left(
            \frac{  \avp{\rho} \avp{v} \avp{E}  - \avm{\rho} \avm{v} \avm{E}  +
                       \avp{v} \avp{p}    - \avm{v} \avm{p} } {\Delta x_j}
             \right) \nonumber \\
         & & + \frac{ \Delta t }{2} g_j^{n+1/2} (\rho_j^n v_j^n + \rho_j^{n+1} v_j^{n+1} ).
     \label{eq:energy_diff}
\end{eqnarray}

We have used subscripts to indicate zone-centered ($j$) and
face-centered ($j+1/2$) quantities, while superscripts refer to
position in time.  The cell width is $\Delta x_j$.  Although they have
been discretized in space, the accuracy of the updates depend on how
well we can compute the fluxes into and out of the cell during $\Delta
t$.  This in turn depends on our ability to compute the time-averaged
values of $p$, $\rho$ and $v$ at the cell interfaces, denoted here by
$\overline{p}_{j\pm 1/2}$, $\overline{\rho}_{j\pm 1/2}$, and
$\overline{v}_{j\pm 1/2}$.  We now describe the steps required to
compute these quantities.

We first construct monotonic piecewise parabolic (third-order)
interpolations in one dimension for each of $p$, $\rho$, and $v$.  The
pressure is determined from equation~(\ref{eq:eq_of_state}), the
equation of state.  The interpolation formula for some quantity $q$ is
given by:
%
\begin{eqnarray}
q_j(x) & = &  q_{L,j} + \tilde{x}(\Delta q_j + q_{6,j}(1-\tilde{x})), \\
\tilde{x}      & \equiv & {x - x_{j-1/2} \over \Delta x_j}, \qquad
             x_{j-1/2} \leq x \leq x_{j+1/2}. \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
%
This is equation~(1.4) of CW84 (in the spatial rather than mass
coordinate, as is appropriate for the direct Eulerian approach).  The
quantities $q_{L,j}$, $\Delta q_j$, and $q_{6,j}$ can be viewed simply
as interpolation constants; however, they also have more intuitive
meanings.  For example, $q_{L,j}$ is the value of $q$ at the left edge
of zone j, while $\Delta q_j$ and $q_{6,j}$ are analogous to the slope
and first-order correction to the slope of $q$ (see CW84 for a
complete discussion):
\begin{equation}
\Delta q_j \equiv q_{R,j} - q_{L,j} \qquad 
q_{6,j}    \equiv 6\left[q_j - 1/2\left(q_{L,j} + q_{R,j}\right)\right].
\end{equation}

We have reduced the problem to finding $q_{L,j}$ and $q_{R,j}$.  While
this is simple in principle, it is complicated somewhat by the
requirement that these values be of sufficient accuracy and that the
resulting distribution be monotonic.  That is, no new maxima or minima
are introduced.  The resulting formulae are straightforward but
complicated and are not reproduced here, but see Equations 1.7 to 1.10
of CW84.  We also optionally allow steepening as described in that
reference.

Once we have the reconstruction, the primary quantities ($p$, $\rho$,
$v$ and $E$) are averaged over the domains corresponding to the three
characteristics $u-c$, $u$, or $u+c$ (where $c$ is the sound speed in
a cell).  The linearized gas dynamics equations are then used to
compute second-order accurate left and right states that take into
account the multiple wave families.  This process is described in CW84
and we use their equations (3.6) and (3.7).

With these effective states, an approximation to the Riemann problem
is found (see below for more detail about the Riemann solvers used),
producing estimates for $\overline{p}_{j\pm 1/2}$,
$\overline{\rho}_{j\pm1/2}$, and $\overline{v}_{j\pm 1/2}$ that are
third-order accurate in space and second-order accurate in time.
These are then used to solve the difference Equations
(\ref{eq:mass_diff})--(\ref{eq:energy_diff}) for $\rho^{n+1}$,
$v^{n+1}$, and $E^{n+1}$.

We include an optional diffusive flux (and flattening for the
parabolic curves) that can improve the solution in some cases.  Our
implementation follows that in the appendix of CW84.

In addition, as discussed earlier, the three-dimensional scheme is
achieved by operator-splitting and repeating the above procedure in
the other two orthogonal directions.  The transverse velocities and
any additional passive quantities are naturally and easily added to
this system (see Equation 3.6 of CW84).  

We note that the acceleration required in
Equation~(\ref{eq:momentum_diff}) is actually the acceleration felt by
the entire zone and not just at the zone center.  Therefore, it is
possible to find the mass-weighted average acceleration over the zone
by expanding the density and acceleration distributions and retaining
all terms up to second-order in $\Delta x$
\citep{1995CoPhC..89..149B}, although we find that the potential is so
slowly varying that this is unnecessary.

% ------------------------------------------------------------

\subsubsection{The dual energy formulation for  very high Mach flows} % 2.4

The system described thus far works well for gravitating systems with
reasonable Mach numbers ($<100$) as long as the structures are well
resolved.  This section and the next detail changes that are required
to correctly account for situations where one or both of these
requirements are not met.

Large, hypersonic bulk flows appear to be very common in cosmological
simulations and they present a problem because of the high ratio of
kinetic energy $E_k$ to gas internal energy $e$, which can reach as
high as $10^8$.  Inverted, we see that the internal energy consists of
an extremely small portion of the total energy.  In such a situation,
the pressure, proportional to $E - E_{k}$, is the small difference
between two large numbers: a disastrous numerical situation.  This is
not as large a problem as it may at first appear because it only
occurs when the pressure is negligibly small.  Therefore, even if we
suffer large errors in the pressure distribution in these regions, the
dynamics and total energy budget of the flow will remain unaffected.
Nevertheless, if the temperature distribution is required for other
reasons (e.g., for calculating radiative processes), a remedy is
required.

To overcome this, we also solve the internal energy equation:
\begin{equation}
 \frac{\partial e}{\partial t} 
           + \frac{1}{a} \vecv \cdot \grad e
%         = - \frac{3(\gamma -1)\dot{a}}{a} e
         = - 3 \frac{\dot{a}}{a} \frac{p}{\rho}
           - \frac{p}{a\rho} \div \vecv
\end{equation}
in comoving coordinates.  The structure is similar to the total energy
equation; the second term on the left hand side represents transport,
while the first term on the right is due to expansion of the
coordinate system.  It is differenced (again, in Eulerian form without
the expansion term) as,
%
\begin{equation}
\rho_j^{n+1} e_j^{n+1}  = 
       \rho_j^n e_j^n   +  \Delta t  \left(
            \frac{  \avp{\rho} \avp{v} \avp{e}  - \avm{\rho} \avm{v} \avm{e}} {\Delta x_j} \right)
            - \Delta t \ p_j^{n} \left( \frac{ \avp{v} - \avm{v}} {\Delta x_j} 
                      \right)
                  \label{eq:gasenergy_diff}
\end{equation}
%
Note that because of the structure of this equation, it is not in
flux-conservative form.  In particular, the pressure is evaluated at
the cell center.  Unfortunately, time-centering of this pressure has
proved difficult to do without generating large errors in the internal
energy and so we leave the pressure at the old time in this difference
equation.  This leads to some spreading of shocks; however, we note
that this equation is only used in hypersonic flows.

It is necessary, however, to conserve the total energy so that the
conversion of kinetic to thermal energy is performed properly.  We
must therefore combine the two formulations without allowing the
separately-advected internal energy $e$ to play a role in the gas
dynamics.  This is done by carrying both terms through the simulation
and using the total energy $E$ for hydrodynamic routines and the
internal energy $e$ when the temperature profile is required.  One way
to view this procedure is to treat $e$ as enhanced precision (extra
digits) for $E$ that automatically `floats' to where it is needed.  We
only require that they be kept synchronized when the two levels of
precision overlap.

When the pressure is required solely for dynamic purposes, the 
selection criterion 
operates on a cell by cell basis using,
\begin{equation}
p = \cases{ \rho(\gamma - 1)(E - \vecv^2/2),& 
                  $  (E - \vecv^2/2)/E > {\eta}_1 $; \cr
            \rho(\gamma -1)e,&
                  $  (E - \vecv^2/2)/E < {\eta}_1 $. \cr}
\end{equation}

It should be stressed that as long as the parameter ${\eta}_1$ is
small enough the dual energy method {\it will have no dynamical
effect}.  We use ${\eta}_1 = 10^{-3}$, which is consistent with the
truncation error of the scheme for grid sizes that are typically used
in our simulations.  We are now free to select the method by which the
internal energy field variable $e$ is updated so that it will not
become contaminated with errors advected by the total energy
formulation but still give the correct distribution in shocked
regions.  Since we are concerned with the advection of errors, the
selection criterion must look at each cell's local neighbourhood.  In
one dimension, this is done with,

\begin{equation}
e = \cases{ (E - \vecv^2/2),& $\rho(E - \vecv^2/2)/
    \max ({\rho}_{j-1}E_{j-1},{\rho}_j E_j,{\rho}_{j+1}E_{j+1}) > {\eta}_2$,\cr
            e,& $\rho(E - \vecv^2/2)/
    \max ({\rho}_{j-1}E_{j-1},{\rho}_j E_j,{\rho}_{j+1}E_{j+1}) < {\eta}_2$.\cr}
    \label{eq:dualselect}
\end{equation}

Thus, ${\eta}_2$ determines when the synchronization (of $e$ with $E$)
occurs.  Too high a value may mask relatively weak shocks, while
spurious heating (via contamination) may occur if it is set too low.
After some experimentation, we have chosen ${\eta}_2 = 0.1$, a
somewhat conservative value.  This scheme is optional and is generally
only required in large-scale cosmological simulations where the gas
cools due to the expansion of the universe but large bulk flows
develop due to the formation of structure.

We note that others have independently developed a similar but
distinct scheme for dealing with this problem, which is endemic to
methods adopting the total energy equation.  In \citet{TVD93}, the two
variables adopted are total energy and entropy (rather than total
energy and thermal energy), with an analogous scheme for choosing
which variable to employ.

\subsubsection{Riemann Solvers and Fallback}
\label{sec.riemann}

In this section, we describe the methods we adopt to solve the Riemann
problem, which is generally required to compute the fluxes in any
Godunov-based scheme.  This section therefore applies to all three of
our Godunov-based schemes.  The Riemann problem we are solving
involves two constant states separated by a single discontinuity at
$t=0$.  The subsequent evolution has an exact analytic solution.  This
solution is described in detail in many texts on computational fluid
dynamics \citep[e.g.,][]{toro-1997}.  In brief, there are three waves
that propagate away from the initial discontinuity.  The central wave,
characterized by a density jump but not a pressure jump, is called the
contact discontinuity.  The waves traveling to the left and right of
the contact discontinuity can be either shocks, if characteristics
converge on the wave front, or rarefaction fans if characteristics
diverge.

While there exists an exact solution to this problem, finding it is
expensive.  There are four possible combination of left- and right-
traveling shocks and rarefactions, only one of which is fully
consistent with the initial conditions.  Once the correct physical
state is determined, the pressure in the central region can only be
computed by finding the root to an algebraic equation, which is
necessarily an iterative process.  Thus a series of \emph{approximate}
Riemann solvers are typically used.  There are four approximate
Riemann solvers in \enzo: two-shock \citep{toro-1997}, Harten-Lax-van
Leer \citep[HLL,][]{toro-1997}, HLL with a contact discontinuity
\citep[HLLC,][]{toro-1997}, and HLL with multiple discontinuities
\citep[HLLD,][]{Miyoshi05}.  Two-shock is used only with the PPM
method.  HLL and HLLC are used with PPM, MUSCL (both with and without
MHD) and MHD-CT.  HLLD is exclusively an MHD solver, and works with
both the MUSCL and MHD-CT methods.

The only approximation that two-shock makes is that both left- and
right-moving waves are shocks.  This solution still requires an
iterative method for finding the pressure in between the two waves.
The HLL method alleviates this iteration by assuming that there is no
central contact discontinuity, and the signal speed in the central
region is approximated by an average over the left- and right- moving
waves.  This method is significantly faster than the two-shock method,
but it is also quite a bit more dissipative.  The HLLC is a three-wave
method that improves upon the HLL method by also including the third
wave, the contact discontinuity.

For the MHD equations, there are seven waves instead of three.  This
makes the exact solution to the Riemann problem quite a bit more
expensive.  Both the HLL and HLLC approximations can be formulated for
the MHD equations, and are employed in both the Dedner and CT solvers
in \enzo.  The HLLD solver includes two of the additional waves, the
rotational discontinuities, making it a five-wave solver.

On rare occasions, high-order solutions can cause negative densities
or energies.  Both our PPM and MUSCL solvers employ a Riemann solver
fallback mechanism \citep{Lemaster09}.  If a negative density is found
at a particular interface, the more diffusive HLL Riemann solver is
used to compute the fluxes associated with that cell, and the flux
update is repeated.



